CAPITAL FORMATION A newly formed private company works hard to establish themselves and survive. Reaching a certain level of success they can decide to take the company public and begin a capital formation phase, which is much shorter for the company than wall street would have you imagine. The DTCC is the SRO(self regulatory organization) that public exchanges rely on to interface with issuers(companies)for compliance with SEA(securities exchange acts)and industry rules that have been added and amended since the formation of the DTC(Depository Trust Company)in 1973. The underwriting phase is when the company crosses the 'T's and dots the 'i's. Once the issuer is compliant, all of the shares they are offering for public trading get immobilized(stored) in a 'vault' at Cede & Co and an "electronic replica' is then created to facilitate the daily trading without the hassles of ownership transfers. The new legal owner of all the shares of the issuer that were offered for public trading is now the DTC through its nominee Cede & Co. A group of institutional banks and acredited investors form a 'syndicate' and negotiate a price per share and buy them from the 'issuer'. ***That step was the companies participation in capital formation.*** Now the syndicate will offer the shares for sale to the public in an IPO(initial public offering), and they are made available on the public exchanges(wall street). Through the years the institutional investors of wall street have created new products and discovered vulnerabilities in the system due to derivative leverage. The creation of amendments and exemptions has allowed for the 'creation' of shares that were never issued by the company, to facilitate liquidity, as without the liquidity the market would slow down and impede the activity by some investors. These 'synthetic shares' have now effectively diluted the stocks 'float'. A quick example of the 'creation' would be a buyer wants 100 shares, and no seller is offering. A market maker sells 100 shares that don't exist, planning to buy them later when shares become available. There are now 100 more shares in the market than the company issued. If the price does not come back down at the time shares are available, the market maker can simply fail to deliver the shares, without consequence, having been paid for the shares, and delivered nothing.
